Another factor that affects the way the
renderer renders the scene is perspective.
When we talk about perspective, again,
we're talking about
the characteristics of the camera.
Once again, the sketches we saw up
until now had the default perspective.
Now we'll see how we can change
those default parameters.
There are four characteristics of
the perspective, the field of view,
the aspect ratio, the near plane,
and the far plane.
The field of view is the extent
of the observable world
that is seen at any given moment.
And in this diagram,
it is the angle theta.
Here are two images taken from
the same location with two cameras.
One camera had a field of
view of 55 degrees and
the other one had a field of view of a 130
degrees, creating this wide angle view.
Humans have a field of view of 210
degrees on the horizontal axis.
And our vertical range
is about 150 degrees.
In P5,
the default field of view is 60 degrees.
The aspect ratio defines the aspect
ratio of the image, that is,
the ratio between the width and
the height of view.
For example, here we have a 4:3 fullscreen
view and a 16:9 widescreen view,
which are popular aspect ratios for
TV and cinema respectively.
In P5, usually you'd want it to be the
same aspect ratio as the canvas, that is,
width over height.
The far and near plane defines two planes
within which 3D objects are observable.
Something that goes beyond
the far plane is not visible.
Something that's nearer than near
plane is also not visible, and
therefore not rendered.
In both cases,
these objects will be clicked.
Let's play with all these
in a live coding example.
So let's look now into perspective.
Again, I'm going to set up a default,
a little dummy scene
there to highlight what's going on,
normalMaterial, something easy.
And then I want to have some rods
that extend into the scene so
that it's easy to see this clipping
thing that I want to show you later on.
So for (var i = -600;
i<= 600; i+=150).
So I want to make, I'll use push and
pop to place this rod.
So translate on the x axis by i, so
I will start putting rods from -600
to 600 at steps of 150.
So 0, 150, sorry, 0 here because we're
translating, here box (80, 80, 500).
So I'm going to be placing boxes that
are 80 times 80 times 500.
Run it, make sure that it compiles.
Perfect, okay.
So I'm seeing these rods now.
Now, I have placed quite a few, but
I only see a small portion of them.
So that's because of the camera view.
So this is what I wanted to demonstrate.
So now, the default camera, let's
actually lift the camera a tiny bit so
that we can see everything
a little bit from higher position,
height, 0, 0, so
still in the center, 0, 0, 1, 0.
So it's a camera that's
almost a default camera view,
only it's a little bit higher and
it's looking down.
So that's what we're getting now,
that's what we managed to get.
Still, I can't fit
everything into the scene.
So that's because the perspective,
perspective, by default, is 60.
Now, this won't work,
yeah, this ruined it,
that's because, again, perspective,
we're talking about radians.
We want to make sure that
the language we're talking about
deals with it in degrees.
So angleMode(DEGREES), boom!
So by default, that's the view we have,
60 degrees point of view.
So if I now make this,
let's say, 120, boom!
It's like having a fish eye,
a wide angle lens, and seeing through it.
Actually, a fish eye would probably
be 180, let's see what that does.
Okay, that did something nasty.
Yep, okay, so let's stick to 120.
Let's leave this back to 60,
the default view.
And now let's play with the next
parameters in perspective,
which is the aspect ratio.
Now, we said that by default,
it's width divided by height,
so in this case, 900 over 600.
So let's loot at that.
Nothing has changed.
Now, if I change this, so
now the ratio is 9 over 6, basically.
Now, if I change this to
something like 4 over 4,
that is 1, so let's leave it 4 over 4.
Look what I'm getting, it's rendering
things as if it was a square canvas,
but the canvas is not square
because it's 900 by 600.
And that's why it appears elongated.
So if I change this manually to 900,
they appear correctly again.
So let's go back,
let's put that width over height.
There's no reason to skew things.
And let's play now with
the final parameter,
which is the planes, which are the planes.
So I'll just say that this
plane is controlled by mouseY,
this one is by mouseX.
So actually,
let me just play with that for the moment.
So if I just use,
the mouse now, mouseY,
is controlling the near plane.
And you see that as the value increases
and I get further away from the camera,
I get clipping, I clip the shape and
I see only half of it.
And let me just make this, let's leave
this as it is actually and do mouseX.
And now mouseX controls
the far away plane.
And sure enough, if I decrease
the value here, it's coming closer.
So somewhere here, it's about zero.
And because I have the other plane
as well, I can still see something.
But this is zero on the x-axis, so
I'm clipping everything
further away from zero.
And this is when I see the whole object.
So I can control now the two planes,
the far away and
the near clipping plane,
with the mouseX and mouseY.
So this wraps up all the parameters
that go into perspective that control
the camera.